content/developer/tutorials/getting_started/03_newapp.rst, before:

.. _tutorials/getting_started/03_newapp:

============================
Chapter 3: A New Application
============================

The purpose of this chapter is to lay the foundation for the creation of a completely new Odoo module.
We will start from scratch with the minimum needed to have our module recognized by Odoo.
In the upcoming chapters, we will progressively add features to build a realistic business case.

The Real Estate Advertisement module
====================================

Our new module will cover a business area which is very specific and therefore not included in the
standard set of modules: real estate. It is worth noting that before
developing a new module, it is good practice to verify that Odoo doesn't already provide a way
to answer the specific business case.

Here is an overview of the main list view containing some advertisements:

.. image:: 03_newapp/overview_list_view_01.png
   :align: center
   :alt: List view 01

The top area of the form view summarizes important information for the property, such as the name,
the property type, the postcode and so on. The first tab contains information describing the
property: bedrooms, living area, garage, garden...

.. image:: 03_newapp/overview_form_view_01.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Form view 01

The second tab lists the offers for the property. We can see here that potential buyers can make
offers above or below the expected selling price. It is up to the seller to accept an offer.

.. image:: 03_newapp/overview_form_view_02.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Form view 02

Here is a quick video showing the workflow of the module.

Hopefully, this video will be recorded soon :-)

Prepare the addon directory
===========================

**Reference**: the documentation related to this topic can be found in
:ref:`manifest <reference/module/manifest>`.

.. note::

   **Goal**: the goal of this section is to have Odoo recognize our new module, which will
   be an empty shell for now. It will be listed in the Apps:

   .. image:: 03_newapp/app_in_list.png
      :align: center
      :alt: The new module appears in the list

The first step of module creation is to create a new directory. To ease the development, we
suggest you first create the directory ``/home/$USER/src/custom``. In this directory we add
another directory ``estate``, which is our module.

A module must contain at least 2 files: the ``__manifest__.py`` file and a ``__init__.py`` file.
The ``__init__.py`` file can remain empty for now and we'll come back to it in the next chapter.
On the other hand, the ``__manifest__.py`` file must describe our module and cannot remain empty.
Its only required field is the ``name``, but it usually contains much more information.

Take a look at the
`CRM file <https://github.com/odoo/odoo/blob/fc92728fb2aa306bf0e01a7f9ae1cfa3c1df0e10/addons/crm/__manifest__.py#L1-L67>`__
as an example. In addition to providing the description of the module (``name``, ``category``,
``summary``, ``website``...), it lists its dependencies (``depends``). A dependency means that the
Odoo framework will ensure that these modules are installed before our module is installed. Moreover, if
one of these dependencies is uninstalled, then our module and **any other that depends on it will also
be uninstalled**. Think about your favorite Linux distribution package manager
(``apt``, ``dnf``, ``pacman``...): Odoo works in the same way.

.. exercise:: Create the required addon files.

    Create the following folders and files:

    - ``/home/$USER/src/custom/estate/__init__.py``
    - ``/home/$USER/src/custom/estate/__manifest__.py``

    The ``__manifest__.py`` file should only define the name and the dependencies of our modules.
    The only necessary framework module for now is ``base``.


Restart the Odoo server and add the ``custom`` folder to the ``addons-path``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ ./odoo-bin --addons-path=../custom,../enterprise/,addons

Go to Apps, click on Update Apps List, search for ``estate`` and... tadaaa, your module appears!
Did it not appear? Maybe try removing the default 'Apps' filter ;-)

.. warning::
   Remember to enable the :ref:`developer mode <developer-mode>` as explained in the previous
   chapter. You won't see the :guilabel:`Update Apps List` button otherwise.

.. exercise:: Make your module an 'App'.

    Add the appropriate key to your ``__manifest__.py`` so that the module appears when the 'Apps'
    filter is on.

You can even install the module! But obviously it's an empty shell, so no menu will appear.

All good? If yes, then let's :ref:`create our first model
<tutorials/getting_started/04_basicmodel>`!

Commit message:

[IMP] tutorials/getting_started: rework the environment setup guide
This commit replaces a big chunk of the instructions relative to the
environment setup with a reference to the equivalent steps listed in the
contribution guide. It also moves the content of the "Create your first
PR" section from chapter 16 to chapter 2, as readers were struggling
with the Git configuration required to push their work to GitHub as they
progressed through the tutorial.

X-original-commit: 276f9817034298bc5628b80e9b2b4888e8fdecd1

content/developer/tutorials/getting_started/03_newapp.rst, after:

.. _tutorials/getting_started/03_newapp:

============================
Chapter 3: A New Application
============================

The purpose of this chapter is to lay the foundation for the creation of a completely new Odoo module.
We will start from scratch with the minimum needed to have our module recognized by Odoo.
In the upcoming chapters, we will progressively add features to build a realistic business case.

The Real Estate Advertisement module
====================================

Our new module will cover a business area which is very specific and therefore not included in the
standard set of modules: real estate. It is worth noting that before
developing a new module, it is good practice to verify that Odoo doesn't already provide a way
to answer the specific business case.

Here is an overview of the main list view containing some advertisements:

.. image:: 03_newapp/overview_list_view_01.png
   :align: center
   :alt: List view 01

The top area of the form view summarizes important information for the property, such as the name,
the property type, the postcode and so on. The first tab contains information describing the
property: bedrooms, living area, garage, garden...

.. image:: 03_newapp/overview_form_view_01.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Form view 01

The second tab lists the offers for the property. We can see here that potential buyers can make
offers above or below the expected selling price. It is up to the seller to accept an offer.

.. image:: 03_newapp/overview_form_view_02.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Form view 02

Here is a quick video showing the workflow of the module.

Hopefully, this video will be recorded soon :-)

Prepare the addon directory
===========================

**Reference**: the documentation related to this topic can be found in
:ref:`manifest <reference/module/manifest>`.

.. note::

   **Goal**: the goal of this section is to have Odoo recognize our new module, which will
   be an empty shell for now. It will be listed in the Apps:

   .. image:: 03_newapp/app_in_list.png
      :align: center
      :alt: The new module appears in the list

The first step of module creation is to create its directory. In the `technical-training-sandbox`
directory, add a new directory :file:`estate`.

A module must contain at least 2 files: the ``__manifest__.py`` file and a ``__init__.py`` file.
The ``__init__.py`` file can remain empty for now and we'll come back to it in the next chapter.
On the other hand, the ``__manifest__.py`` file must describe our module and cannot remain empty.
Its only required field is the ``name``, but it usually contains much more information.

Take a look at the
`CRM file <https://github.com/odoo/odoo/blob/fc92728fb2aa306bf0e01a7f9ae1cfa3c1df0e10/addons/crm/__manifest__.py#L1-L67>`__
as an example. In addition to providing the description of the module (``name``, ``category``,
``summary``, ``website``...), it lists its dependencies (``depends``). A dependency means that the
Odoo framework will ensure that these modules are installed before our module is installed. Moreover, if
one of these dependencies is uninstalled, then our module and **any other that depends on it will also
be uninstalled**. Think about your favorite Linux distribution package manager
(``apt``, ``dnf``, ``pacman``...): Odoo works in the same way.

.. exercise:: Create the required addon files.

    Create the following folders and files:

    - ``/home/$USER/src/technical-training-sandbox/estate/__init__.py``
    - ``/home/$USER/src/technical-training-sandbox/estate/__manifest__.py``

    The ``__manifest__.py`` file should only define the name and the dependencies of our modules.
    The only necessary framework module for now is ``base``.


Restart the Odoo server and go to Apps. Click on Update Apps List, search for ``estate`` and...
tadaaa, your module appears! Did it not appear? Maybe try removing the default 'Apps' filter ;-)

.. warning::
   Remember to enable the :ref:`developer mode <developer-mode>` as explained in the previous
   chapter. You won't see the :guilabel:`Update Apps List` button otherwise.

.. exercise:: Make your module an 'App'.

    Add the appropriate key to your ``__manifest__.py`` so that the module appears when the 'Apps'
    filter is on.

You can even install the module! But obviously it's an empty shell, so no menu will appear.

All good? If yes, then let's :ref:`create our first model
<tutorials/getting_started/04_basicmodel>`!
